---
title: Three Pointers for Your Next Interview
date: 2021-06-05 09:00:00
tags:
    - Interview
    - Experience

category: Experience 
keywords:
    - Interview
    - Experience

mathjax: true
---


### Three Pointers for Your Next Interview
*Originally Published in [Illumination](https://medium.com/illumination/three-pointers-for-your-next-interview-41ed6a7c97ce)*

#### Succinctness, revisiting the unanswered, and adding context.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1800/1*FK0AWKP1_GIf-TSO_KspBA.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Photo by [Geraldine
Lewa](https://unsplash.com/@geraldine_lewa?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/job--interview?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)</span>

I like to see interviews as a two-way process where both you and the company try
to find the right match. This makes it an experience rather than just a pursuit
of answering questions.

With each interview, I’ve had at least a handful of learnings that I think can
benefit anyone reading this post. Even if you have no interviews ahead, a few of
these pointers might help you convert any ‘No’ to a ‘Yes.’ I’ll skip a few of
the tips and tricks you can find below.

1.  [This Expert Approach Will Prepare You For Any
Interview](https://medium.com/swlh/this-expert-approach-will-prepare-you-for-any-interview-d8b62e3be03d)
by [Matt
Russell](https://medium.com/@Matt_Russell?source=post_page-----d8b62e3be03d--------------------------------)
1.  [7 Interview Tips To Find Your Dream
Job](https://medium.com/@thebriantracy/7-interview-tips-to-find-your-dream-job-bb72cc53520f)
by [Brian
Tracy](https://medium.com/@thebriantracy?source=post_page-----bb72cc53520f--------------------------------)
1.  [Fool-Proof Tips To Ace That Job
Interview](https://medium.com/1-one-infinity/fool-proof-tips-to-ace-that-job-interview-c97cd910eda1)
by [Jon
Peters](https://jonpeterswrites.medium.com/?source=post_page-----c97cd910eda1--------------------------------)
1.  [Ten tips to succeed in an
Interview](https://medium.com/kainos/ten-tips-to-succeed-in-an-interview-2bd5a2287c94)
by [Kieran
Barber](https://medium.com/@kieran.barber?source=post_page-----2bd5a2287c94--------------------------------)

I really liked how [Matt Russell](https://medium.com/u/9c9c8c942de8) highlights
the significance of “Examples” and “Impact” in his article.

Now starting with few pointers that I’ve observed to be quite salutary for
almost any interview.

*****

#### Don’t Leave Unanswered Questions Floating.

It’s almost common for there to be at least one question that we fail to answer
during an interview.

While answering back with an honest ‘I am sorry, I am not aware of that,’ do
remember the question or at least a part of it.

Once the interviewer is done with the interview and if he/she has few more
minutes to spare, you can ask them to direct you to the answer to the question.

Not exactly by asking “What is the answer?” but more along the lines of “How do
I approach such a question?” or “Where could I learn more about that?”.

This might dust off any negative chalk on the interviewer's slate on your
inability to answer a question.

Ideally, you must see it as an opportunity to expand your horizons and be ready
for any such question in the future.

If you have too many unanswered questions, it’d not be the best idea to ask
interviewers directions to each.

In such a situation, I’d ask him top one or two, the answer to which I feel to
have missed by few inches.

*****

#### Succinctness Is The Key

During my initial interviews, once I started describing any of the projects, I
used to speak at lengths describing every aspect, leaving no silent moments for
the interviewer to interrupt and ask his questions.

I learned that when someone asks, “Describe/Expand on this Project,” it mostly
means to describe in brief.

I generally start with a two-three-liner overview, give a pause, and add one or
two more.

If the interviewer is interested, he’ll want to know more about the project and
will ask few more questions. I found this to be the right time to mention the
specifics/details of the project.

Also, towards the end of the interview, I found it quite comforting to ask the
interviewer more about the company, the interviewer's role, and your expected
role.

This gives you a chance to slide the information you couldn’t cover during the
interview that you think might bolster your profile.

*****

#### Give The “Why you feel so?” Answer

It is not uncommon for one to encounter questions whose answer can be just a
yes/no. What I’d suggest is to add a succinct backstory to this about “Why you
feel so?”.

“Are you familiar with Java?”

“Yes, I use it as my primary development language and have used it in most of my
projects.”

or

“No, I mainly use C++ as my development language. But given the need to use Java
in any project, I can quickly master it given my proficiency in C++.”

Both of these are miles better than a simple Yes/No answer. Back each of your
answers with some history and try to turn a No into a better No.

This is also applicable in cliche questions such as “What are your strengths?”.

Don’t just mention your strengths; add the “Why you feel so?” part.

Add examples, very short anecdotes, or an experience. This will most definitely
add weight to your answer.

*****

Thanks a lot for reading, and All The Best for that next interview!

Do check out the reading list mentioned at the start for some more comprehensive
tips and tricks.

Leaving you with one of my favorite quotes. Feel free to reach out over
[Twitter](http://twitter.com/nemathahmed)!

> “If a man is called to be a street sweeper,<br> he should sweep streets even as
> Michelangelo painted,<br> or Beethoven composed music or Shakespeare wrote
poetry.<br> He should sweep streets so well that all the hosts<br> of heaven and
earth will pause to say,<br> here lived a great street sweeper who did his job
well “— Martin Luther King
