---
title: The 2020s- A Big Decade for Telemedicine
date: 2021-01-25 09:00:00
tags:
    - Healthcare
    - Technology

category: Technology 
keywords:
    - Healthcare
    - Telemedicine
mathjax: true
---
### The 2020s: A Big Decade for Telemedicine
*Originally Published in [Geek Culture](https://medium.com/geekculture/the-2020s-a-big-decade-for-telemedicine-7b486dff4588)*
#### The Growth Attributed to the Pandemic

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1800/1*PDYtvEh1hEOP5UUpe5_i7g.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Photo by [Daan
Stevens](https://unsplash.com/@daanstevens?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/health-paintings?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)</span>

> The Pandemic taught us something essential — the value of healthcare.

During the peak COVID season, we saw how the lack of healthcare facilities led
to fatalities that could have been prevented. This was the case even with
countries with world-class healthcare systems.

What we can learn from this experience is that we need something more than the
existing systems in place. For instance, imagine a system where everything was
centralized. All your vitals being monitored 24x7 and being sent to a central
system where doctors work with algorithms to detect anomalies. A system where
all your beds have the capabilities to convert to a step-down ICU with a push of
a button. If such systems find their way into our daily lives, then no matter
how big a pandemic occurs, we’ll thrive.

The upcoming decade must become one of the game-changers for the development of
healthcare technologies and their adoption. The feat accomplished in the 2010s,
especially in meadows of computation, automation, and forecasting, makes the
2020s a mattering decade for their adoption and usage. Working together with
technologies such as artificial intelligence, nano-tech, and mixed reality, the
industry must focus on infrastructure that makes healthcare more accessible —
paving the way for smarter therapies and personalized medical care.

*****

#### Telemedicine: Exploiting The Ubiquitous

One of the interesting branches of healthcare to look out for is Telemedicine.
In the research article by [Asim
Kichloo](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=Kichloo%20A%5BAuthor%5D&cauthor=true&cauthor_uid=32816942)
on [Telemedicine’s
future](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7437610/), it is revealed
how Telemedicine has become a means of ‘forward triage’ and the positive impacts
it has in public health emergency beyond facilitating triages — including
allowing the rapid deployment of large numbers of healthcare providers and the
providing of services when local hospitals and healthcare centers are unable to
meet demand.

> Telemedicine is a service that is rapidly evolving to provide increased access
> to high-quality healthcare that is efficient and cost-effective, especially in
the midst of the current COVID-19 pandemic.

As wireless technology, cell phones, and the internet become more ubiquitous,
new ways are paved for delivering health care at a distance. These can include
Televisits, Telemonitoring, Teleconsultation, and other services provided in
synchronous(video/teleconferencing) or asynchronous(store-and-froward) forms.

Telemedicine dates back to mid 20th century when radio-communication was used to
provide medical advice for people on ships and in the military. The first usage
in hospitals was in the 1950s, starting with psychiatric consultations.
Telemedicine has expanded to patients with strokes, heart diseases, and even
chronic illnesses such as asthma and diabetes in the past three decades.

> ‘Effective Alternative’ and ‘Satisfying’ for patient and provider — Langarizadeh
> M, et. al. [Telemental Health Care](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29284913/)

In events such as a pandemic, traditional healthcare systems give priority to
the infected — and naturally, they are the ones to get the authentic healthcare
information about the pandemic. This leaves the non-infected to rely on social
media, news channels, and IMs for the knowledge — which can more than often be
bogus and unreliable. Telemedicine strives to provide healthcare information not
only to the infected but also to the non-infected, which reduces being fed with
false information.

The benefits of telemedicine have encouraged discussion around the integration
of telemedicine into accreditation for healthcare providers. The discussions
have further led to new methods. For example, bots are now helping to refer
moderate and high-risk patients to healthcare personnel.

*****

Telemedicine is promising as the future of healthcare. In a study by
[IBISWorld](https://www.ibisworld.com/industry-insider/analyst-insights/the-current-state-of-the-telehealth-services-industry/),
the telehealth services’ annual growth rate was estimated at 34.7% from
2014–2019 and is projected to grow from $45B in 2019 to more than $175B in 2026.

Until 2019 more than 82% of the USA population did not use telemedicine in any
form. But this changed with COVID. The number of users increased from
11,000/week to 650,000/week — A Big Surge!

The restrictions lifted by the US government were a big reason for the surge.
Before COVID, there were restrictions in place to ensure no overexploitation of
telemedicine. The policymakers feared people using too much telemedicine once it
became accessible as the main focus was only to make healthcare accessible to
rural areas. Besides, the doctors’ general business model is tied to in-person
visits, which further reduced the adoption rate.

But all this changed with Pandemic. Teladoc Health, a telemedicine and virtual
healthcare company, was listed by Credit Suisse in its list of the top-10
investing ideas during the pandemic. Having experienced telehealth, not all
people will be willing to go back to regular in-person visits after the pandemic
— telemedicine is here to stay.

That being said, telemedicine is not for everyone. There are still many issues
that just can’t be resolved over a video call, such as a physical examination,
let alone the lack of access to a reliable internet connection. Another concern
when considering telemedicine and mobile health is the security of personal
health information.

*****

Considering all the aspects of telemedicine, it makes sense to have it
integrated into our healthcare system. It is projected that in five years,
almost half of the healthcare-related consultation will be fully virtual. If
implemented properly, it can be a win-win for both patients, and the doctor as
all the indirect costs such as changing three buses to arrive at the doctor’s
office will now be eliminated.

Telemedicine has continued to grow in uptake and shows tremendous promise in
expanding access to health care, promoting patient disease management, and
facilitating in-between health care visit monitoring.

**Telemedicine will be a big part of what comes after covid-19**

*****

Thanks for reading! Feel free to reach out on
[Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/nemathahmed) and
[LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/in/nemathahmed).
