---
title: The Crypto Consensus Mechanism
date: 2021-06-07 09:00:00
tags:
    - Crypto


category: Technology 
keywords:
    - Crypto


mathjax: true
---


### The Crypto Consensus Mechanism
*Originally Published in [Predict](https://medium.com/predict/the-crypto-consensus-mechanism-64bc8a7efabe)*

#### Who’s the authority here?

Cryptocurrency has been in the limelight for the past few months. With its
universal and decentralized aspects, many aren’t shying away from calling it the
currency of the future. There are more than four thousand cryptocurrencies in
existence, and their number has been on the rise.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2600/1*DTOvqi9iH6b5guK8p0_hyg.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Photo by [Dmitry
Demidko](https://unsplash.com/@wildbook?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/bitcoin?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)</span>

For jumping on the bandwagon of the cryptocurrency craze, many startups in the
past few years have been considering Initial Coin Offerings or ICOs. According
to CNBC, almost half of the ICOs fail.

Apart from ICOs, there are various reasons for which online businesses opt to
start a new cryptocurrency. This may be to access a new customer base, eliminate
fraud risks, or simply for transaction anonymity. From the idea of creating new
crypto to actually launching it, there are a series of steps. The very first one
of which is choosing a consensus mechanism.

### The Consensus Mechanism

In short, these are the protocols that consider a particular transaction
legitimate and add it to the block. Let’s see what this means.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*poXRRZdZAElrrP9C3ZQLoQ.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Photo by [Taylor
Vick](https://unsplash.com/@tvick?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/servers?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)</span>

Blockchains, unlike centralized systems, are dynamically changing. A centrally
stored driver license database can be updated only by a central administration
with authority to ensure genuine records. However, with blockchain, it is a
self-regulating system with no authority. This self-regulating system comprises
millions of participants who work on the verification and authentication of
transactions on the blockchain.

For such a fast-changing status of blockchain, the shared ledgers need to be
efficient, reliable, secure, and functional to verify the Genuity of the
transactions and ensure all participants agree on the status of the ledger. This
task is performed by the consensus mechanism — a set of rules to make decisions
on the activities on the blockchain.

### PoW Mechanism

The most popular cryptocurrency today, Bitcoin, uses the Proof of Work (PoW)
consensus mechanism. In the mechanism, the participant node has to achieve the
right to add a new transaction to the blockchain by proving the work done.

> “PoW describes a system that requires a not-insignificant but feasible amount of
> effort in order to deter malicious uses of computing power.” — Jake,
Investopedia

This mechanism requires participants to spend efforts solving arbitrary math
problems to prevent compromising the system from any frivolous attacks. This is
also used in mining new tokens along with validating transactions.

Such mechanisms help the crypto transaction to occur without the need for a
trusted third party. This mechanism was originally created as a solution to spam
emails, and the one used by Bitcoin is based on the SHA-256 hashing function.

PoW makes it highly resource-intensive to overtake the network. Another
mechanism known as Proof of Stake (PoS) allots mining power based on tokens held
in the wallet. It randomly assigns the node that would mine or validate
transactions based on coins the node holds. It is quite less resource-intensive
compared to PoW but has a risk of 51% attack in small altcoins.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*p7wcICmvAVUqqxtM9kbI9w.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">Photo by [André François
McKenzie](https://unsplash.com/@silverhousehd?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/bitcoin?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)</span>

*****

The consensus mechanism you choose will pave the road for the next steps in
creating your crypto, which includes picking a blockchain platform, designing
the nodes, building the architecture, and so forth. Today’s best blockchain
platforms include Ethereum, Waves, and NEM, and the Transparency, security, and
fraud prevention they provide make them quite desirable for many online
businesses.
